# EDAM_ground_truth

Ground truth dataset of life sciences software, including 45 analyzed tools by experts. 
In total, 16 experts took part in the ground truth: 2 for Genetic Variant, 2 in Metagenomics, 3 in Phylogeny, 2 in
Single Cell, 3 in Systems Biology and 4 experts in Bio-imaging, which includes the fields of Microscopy
and Neuroimaging .
A LLM (DeepSeek V3.1) was used to annotate the ground-truth data, and these annotations were reviewed and validated by experts. Those selected by the experts were incorporated into the expert–LLM consensus.
The expert-LLM annotations from the tools are compared to those in [bio.tools registry](https://bio.tools/) using the [**EDAM ontology**](https://edamontology.org/page).
This ground truth are supported by the [ShareFAIR](https://projet.liris.cnrs.fr/sharefair/).

---

## Table of Contents
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Content](#content)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [License](#license)
- [Authors and Affiliations](#authors-and-affiliations)

---

## Installation

1. **Clone the EDAM_ground_truth repository**

```bash
git clone https://github.com/ulysseLeclanche/EDAM_ground_truth.git
```

```bash
cd EDAM_ground_truth
```

2. **All the packages used are listed in `environment.yml`; a Conda environment can be created**

```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml
```

```bash
conda activate EDAM_GT
```

## Content 

This repository contains resources related to the EDAM ground truth dataset of life sciences software. 
Specifically, it includes:

- [`Prompt_examples_two_annotated_tools.txt`](Prompt_examples_two_annotated_tools.txt) – Examples of prompts provided to DeepSeek V3.1 to generate annotations following the same procedure as domain experts.
- [`Tools_lists.csv`](Tools_lists.csv) – List of tools included in this ground truth along with their corresponding entries in [bio.tools](https://bio.tools/).
- [`Raw_free_text_annotation/`](Raw_free_text_annotation/) – Raw annotations from both experts and the LLM, along with their conversion into JSON format.
  - The JSON files are generated using the notebook [`Confusion_matrix_json.ipynb`](Confusion_matrix_json.ipynb).
- [`Confusion_matrix_free_text_annotation/`](Confusion_matrix_free_text_annotation/) – Confusion matrices (TP, FN, FP, recall, precision, F1 score) comparing the annotations generated by the LLM and those by the experts against the final expert-LLM consensus for each domain. 
  - These matrices were computed using the notebook [`Confusion_matrix_json.ipynb`](Confusion_matrix_json.ipynb).
- [`plots/`](plots/) – Figures for recall, precision, F1 score by domains and annotation types.
  - The figures are calculated using the notebook [`Contribution_LLM_expert_Precision_recall_F1_figures.ipynb`](Contribution_LLM_expert_Precision_recall_F1_figures.ipynb).
- [`Distribution_free_text_annotation/`](Distribution_free_text_annotation/) – Free-text annotations organized by type, including topic, operation, input/output data type, and input/output format. 
  - These distributions were calculated and visualized using [`Distribution_free_text_annotation.ipynb`](Distribution_free_text_annotation.ipynb).
- [`Contingency_table/`](Contingency_table/) – Contingency tables of free-text annotations validated by experts, showing results compared to existing entries in the bio.tools database.
  - The notebook [`Contingency_table_annotation_consensus_mapped.ipynb`](Contingency_table_annotation_consensus_mapped.ipynb) calculates the contingency table for free-text annotations, regardless of whether they have been validated as EDAM annotations.
  - The notebook [`Contingency_table_Biotools_vs_ground_truth.ipynb`](Contingency_table_Biotools_vs_ground_truth.ipynb)  calculates the contingency table comparing EDAM annotations validated by experts with those in the bio.tools repository.

## Usage

1. **View tools and examples**

   * Check `Tools_lists.csv` for the list of tools and their [bio.tools](https://bio.tools/) entries.
   * Refer to `Prompt_examples_two_annotated_tools.txt` to see sample prompts used with DeepSeek V3.1.

2. **Work with raw annotations**

   * `Raw_free_text_annotation/` contains expert and LLM annotations in text and JSON formats.
   * Use `Confusion_matrix_json.ipynb` to generate confusion matrices comparing LLM and expert annotations.

3. **Analyze performance metrics**

   * `Confusion_matrix_free_text_annotation/` and `plots/` provide recall, precision, and F1 score visualizations by domain.
   * Run `Contribution_LLM_expert_Precision_recall_F1_figures.ipynb` to reproduce the plots.

4. **Explore annotation distributions**

   * `Distribution_free_text_annotation/` contains categorized free-text annotations (topic, operation, input/output type/format).
   * Generate distributions using `Distribution_free_text_annotation.ipynb`.

5. **Compare with bio.tools**

   * `Contingency_table/` shows validated annotations against bio.tools entries.
   * Reproduce or update contingency tables with `Contingency_table_annotation_consensus_mapped.ipynb` and `Contingency_table_Biotools_vs_ground_truth.ipynb`.

## Authors and Affiliations:

**Authors:**  
Ulysse Le Clanche¹, Melvin Selim Atay², Elise Bannier²,³, Anaïs Baudot⁴,⁵, Lea Bellenger⁶, Alexandrina Bodrug⁶, Samuel Chaffron⁷, Eric Charpentier⁶, Erwan Corre⁸, Clémence Frioux⁹, Aurélie Lardenois¹⁰, Frédéric Lemoine¹¹, Camille Maumet², Cyril Noël¹², Perrine Paul-Gilloteaux¹³, Paul Simion¹⁴, Morgane Térézol⁴, Olivier Dameron¹, and Alban Gaignard⁶

**Affiliations:**  
1. Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA - UMR 6074, F-35000 Rennes, France
2. Univ Rennes, CNRS, Inria, Inserm, IRISA UMR 6074, EMPENN — ERL U 1228, F-35000 Rennes, France
3. CHU Rennes, Radiology Department, Rennes, France
4. Aix Marseille Université, INSERM, MMG, Marseille, France
5. CNRS, Marseille, France
6. Nantes Université, CNRS, INSERM, l'institut du thorax, F-44000 Nantes, France
7. Nantes Université, École Centrale Nantes, CNRS, LS2N, UMR 6004, F-44000 Nantes, France
8. ABiMS-IFB, Station Biologique de Roscoff, CNRS/Sorbonne Université, Roscoff, France
9. Inria, Univ. Bordeaux, INRAE, 33400, Talence, France
10. Institut National de Santé et de Recherche Médicale, U1085-Irset, Université de Rennes 1, F-35042 Rennes, France
11. Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, Bioinformatics of Biostatistics Hub, F-75015 Paris, France
12. SeBiMER Service de Bioinformatique de l'Ifremer, Ifremer, IRSI, Plouzané, France
13. Nantes Université, CHU Nantes, CNRS, Inserm, BioCore, US16, SFR Bonamy, Nantes, France
14. EcoBio - Ecosystems, Biodiversity, Evolution, Université de Rennes 1, 35042 Rennes, France

## License

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).
